docs: add implementation detail document (#14)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation: _docs/implementation.md

# Introduction
This proposal outlines a method for injecting runtime hooks into target functions in Go programs, enabling dynamic monitoring and modification of function behavior. The approach leverages trampoline code injection and function pointer redirection to seamlessly integrate monitoring logic without requiring significant changes to the user's codebase.

The goal is to provide a flexible and non-intrusive mechanism for instrumenting Go applications, particularly for use cases such as observability (e.g., OpenTelemetry), debugging, or performance profiling.

# Core Principles
## 1. Trampoline Code Injection

> We inject trampoline code into the Target (lib-side) function, which ultimately jumps to the actual monitoring code via the function pointer Hook.

Reviewer: To be precise, it's trampoline function call
```suggestion
We inject trampoline function call into the Target (lib-side) function, which ultimately jumps to the actual monitoring code via the function pointer Hook.
```

Reviewer: Just to avoid additional questions and confusions, I think it would be good to explain why are we doing two-level indirection, first `Trampoline` call, then hook, instead of let's say directly injecting opentelemetry code.

```go
func Target() {
    Trampoline()
    ....
}

func Trampoline() {
    Hook()
}

//go:linkname Hook github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation/sdk/hook.MyHook
var Hook func()
```

## 2. Linkage via golinkname
The `Hook` function is linked to the monitoring code using the `//go:linkname` directive. This allows us to dynamically associate the hook with the target function at compile time.

# Implementation Details

> ## 1. Adding Dependencies

Reviewer: From my perspective, go compile time instrumentation is two-phase process. First pass is about updating dependencies, second about building project (via some kind of proxy tool)

Author: Using a two-phase narrative is a good idea. I revised the design doc based on the comments. Please help review it when you have time. Thanks!

The goal is to provide a flexible and non-intrusive mechanism for instrumenting Go applications, particularly for use cases such as observability (e.g., OpenTelemetry), debugging, or performance profiling.

# Core Principles
## 1. Trampoline Code Injection
Trampoline function calls are injected into the Target (lib-side) function, which ultimately jumps to the actual hook code via the function pointer Hook.

```go
func Target() {
    Trampoline()
    ....
}

func Trampoline() {
    Hook()
}

//go:linkname Hook github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation/sdk/hook.MyHook
var Hook func()
```
The two-level indirection (trampoline call to hook) is a deliberate design choice that offers several key benefits:

- Exception Handling: The trampoline catches panics and isolates exception handling, preventing them from affecting the target function or hook code.
- Context Construction: The trampoline initializes and manages the necessary context before invoking the hook code.
- Decoupling: The trampoline decouples the hook code from the target function, enabling flexibility and maintainability.

> - Debugging: The trampoline provides a centralized point for debugging and observability.

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to move this up before the example...

I'd add the trampoline allows dynamic instrumentation (that can be turned on/off at run-time).

## 2. Linkage via golinkname

> The `Hook` function is linked to the monitoring code using the `//go:linkname` directive. This allows us to dynamically associate the hook with the target function at compile time.

Reviewer 2: I'd clarify this is putting us in the "handshake" style of `//go:linkname` (this is using language from the maintainers), which is expected to continue being supported indefinitely (as opposed to "pull", which is blocked outside of grandfathered-in exceptions)

# Implementation Details

> Go compile-time instrumentation is a two-phase process: the first phase involves updating dependencies, and the second phase focuses on building the project using a custom toolchain.

Reviewer 2: Updating dependencies is done as part of set-up, isn't it? It would be nice to perhaps have a schema explaining what happens at what time ("setup/coding time" versus "compilation time" versus "run time" [for illustration, since we do nothing at run time])

## Phase 1: Adding Dependencies

> To prepare the project for instrumentation, we first integrate the necessary dependencies into the user's codebase. This step ensures that the required hook code is available during the build process.

Reviewer: I think it would be good to clarify the meaning of 'we' in this description. Does it mean that the user should modify the sources manually, or will it be done automatically by the toolchain?

This can be done by creating or modifying files. For example:

```go
// otel_importer.go
package main

import _ "github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation/sdk"
```

This import statement ensures that the SDK, which contains the hook code, is included in the project. The `_` prefix indicates that the package is imported only for its side effects (e.g., registration of hooks).

> After adding the dependency, we run `go mod tidy` to update the `go.mod` file. This step ensures that the dependency is properly recorded and downloaded into the module cache.

Reviewer: Same here — who is actually running `go mod tidy`?

Author: Good catch! I will remove the first-person pronoun "we" and use a more neutral expression.

> By completing this phase, the project is now ready for the next step, where the instrumentation logic will be applied during the build process.

Reviewer 2: This is a place where we can possibly cross-reference with #11.

## Phase 2: Building with Instrumentation

> The build process is invoked with a custom toolchain by specifying the `-toolexec=otel` flag

Author: Commented in that PR regarding the name

```bash
go build -toolexec=otel

> ```

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we should explicitly support folks specifying `-toolexec` "by hand" or if we should wrap `go build` entirely (and manage it behind the scenes). It can be useful to have a way to maintain state throughout the entire build, and that is made significantly easier if we control the root process...

I'm not entirely certain this is necessary, though...

Author: I prefer to support both `otel go build` and `go build -toolexec=otel`. Perhaps I should explicitly mention in the documentation that the motivation for supporting `go build -toolexec=otel` is that it allows us to directly append `-toolexec=otel` via the `GOFLAGS` environment variable, without having to modify the build command (`go build`).

Author: > @y1yang0 +1 to support both of the usage. Would you please add it to the doc?

Done

The `-toolexec=otel` flag specifies a custom tool (e.g., otel) that intercepts compilation commands. The tool identifies the target function from the compilation commands and injects trampoline code into the AST of these functions. Since the hook dependency was already imported in Phase 1, the tool can link the target function to the hook code via //go:linkname without requiring any additional modifications.

# Interface Design
## 1. Context
The Context interface is designed to provide a structured way to access and manipulate the parameters, return values, and other relevant data of the target function. This allows the hook code to interact with the target function's execution context seamlessly.

Example:
```go
func MyHookBefore(ctx Context) {
	ctx.GetFuncName()
	ctx.GetParam(1)
	ctx.SetParam(1, "new value")
	ctx.GetReturnValue(1)
	ctx.SetReturnValue(1, "new value")
	ctx.SetData("msg", "hello world")
}
func MyHookAfter(ctx Context) {
	msg := ctx.GetData("msg")
}

> ```

Author: Yes, the approach I described here was only to simplify the initial implementation. In fact, there are at least two ways to avoid redundant type assertions(in my mind):

1. Declare the types in the hook function parameters:
```go
// plugin developers:
func MyHookBefore(ctx Context, param1 int, param2 Request) {
	...
}
func MyHookAfter(ctx Context, ret1 string, ret2 error) {
	...
}
```

This is the approach used in our current repository (alibaba-otel), and it is proven to be feasible.

2. Generate methods for the Context object:

```go
// otel generated:
func (ctx *MyHookContext) GetParam1() int {...}
func (ctx *MyHookContext) GetParam2() double {...}

func (ctx *MyHook2Context) GetParam1() double {...}
func (ctx *MyHook2Context) GetParam2() Request {...}

// plugin developers:
type MyHookContext {} // implements all methods of Context

func (ctx *MyHookContext) MyHookBefore() {
	ctx.GetParam1() // type of int
}
func (ctx *MyHook2Context)  MyHook2Before() {
	ctx.GetParam1() // type of double
}
```
This also seems feasible, but it requires plugin developers to write more code. Additionally, the IDE will complain that `ctx.GetParam1` cannot be found because this method is dynamically generated by the otel tool during compilation.

> ```

Author: The first approached is practical, feasible, and convenient. If there are no further objections, I will proceed with the first one.

## 2. Full Context API
The full context API is listed below.

> ```go

Reviewer: Consider extracting this into a source file and linking to it instead.

type Context interface {
	// Skip the original function call
	SetSkipCall(bool)
	// Check if the original function call should be skipped

> 	IsSkipCall() bool

Author: Let's remove it.

	// Set the data field, can be used to pass information between OnEnter & OnExit
	SetData(interface{})
	// Get the data field, can be used to pass information between OnEnter & OnExit
	GetData() interface{}
	// Get the map data field by key
	GetKeyData(key string) interface{}
	// Set the map data field by key

> 	SetKeyData(key string, val interface{})

Author: Not quite sure if the "extracted out" you mentioned means removing them as part of the context API? If that's the case, then that's okay to me

> 	SetKeyData(key string, val interface{})

Reviewer 2: I mean something like isolating them in a dedicated interface, or just use a plain context.Context object for this? Either way I think you did get my point there.

	// Has the map data field by key
	HasKeyData(key string) bool
	// Get the original function parameter at index idx
	GetParam(idx int) interface{}
	// Change the original function parameter at index idx
	SetParam(idx int, val interface{})
	// Get the original function return value at index idx
	GetReturnVal(idx int) interface{}
	// Change the original function return value at index idx
	SetReturnVal(idx int, val interface{})
	// Get the original function name
	GetFuncName() string
	// Get the package name of the original function
	GetPackageName() string
}
```

Key Features:
- Parameter Access and Modification: Allows inspection and alteration of function arguments.

> - Return Value Manipulation: Enables modification of return values before they are passed back to the caller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Return Value Manipulation: Enables the modification of return values before they are returned to the caller.
```

# Introduction

This document outlines a method for injecting runtime hooks into target functions
in Go programs, enabling dynamic monitoring and modification of function behavior.
The approach leverages trampoline code injection and function pointer redirection
to seamlessly integrate monitoring logic without requiring significant changes to
the user's codebase.

The goal is to provide a flexible and non-intrusive mechanism for instrumenting
Go applications, particularly for use cases such as observability (e.g., OpenTelemetry),

> debugging, or performance profiling.

Author: Done

included in the project. The `_` prefix indicates that the package is imported
only for its side effects (e.g., registration of hooks).

After adding the dependency, `go mod tidy` is run to update the `go.mod` file.
This step ensures that the dependency is properly recorded and downloaded into
the module cache.
By completing this phase, the project is now ready for the next step, where the
instrumentation logic will be applied during the build process.

## Phase 2: Building with Instrumentation

The build process is invoked with a custom toolchain by specifying the `-toolexec=otel` flag

```bash
go build -toolexec=otel
```

The `-toolexec=otel` flag specifies a custom tool (e.g., otel) that intercepts
compilation commands. The tool identifies the target function from the compilation
commands and injects trampoline code into the AST of these functions. Since the
hook dependency was already imported in Phase 1, the tool can link the target
function to the hook code via //go:linkname without requiring any additional
modifications.

# Interface Design

## 1. Context

The Context interface is designed to provide a structured way to access and

> manipulate the parameters, return values, and other relevant data of the target

Author: the description already contains `parameters, return values`, `exceptions, panics, goroutine local storage` are unrelated stuff.

- Dynamic Instrumentation: The trampoline allows turn-on/off instrumentation
  at runtime, enabling dynamic control over monitoring behavior.

The code snippet below illustrates the two-level indirection, where the Target
function is the target function to be instrumented, and the Hook function is the
monitoring code that will be executed.

```go
func Target() {
    Trampoline()
    ....
}

func Trampoline() {
    Hook()
}

//go:linkname Hook github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation/sdk/hook.MyHook
var Hook func()
```

## 2. Linkage via golinkname

The `Hook` function is linked to the monitoring code using the `//go:linkname`
directive. This allows us to dynamically associate the hook with the target
function at compile time.

# Implementation Details

Go compile-time instrumentation is a two-phase process: the first phase involves
setup dependencies, and the second phase focuses on building the project using
a custom toolchain.

## Phase 1: Setup Dependencies

### 1.1 Dependency Analysis
The first step is to analyze the project's dependencies by collecting the list 
of modules involved in the build. This is done using the `go build -n` command, 

> which prints the build plan without executing it.

Author: Very good suggestion!

There is a technical detail here: go build supports various command-line methods:
```
go build [packages]

Usually, [packages] is a list of import paths.

Example:

1.go build std
2.go build all
3.go build cmd
4.go build main.go
5.go build ./...
6.go build ./cmd1 ./cmd2
7.go build -modfile file ./cmd1 ./cmd2
```
When using the `go list -json [packages]` approach, we first need to identify from the user's go build command which parameters belong to `[packages]`. However, this is actually challenging. For example, in case #7, how do we determine whether `{file, ./cmd1, ./cmd2}` all belong to `[packages]`, or only `{./cmd1, ./cmd2}` are part of `[packages]`?

When using the `go build -n` approach, we simply need to add an additional `-n` parameter to the user's original command.

> which prints the build plan without executing it.

Reviewer: I understand @RomainMuller's concerns about plan parsing potentially being unstable. However, I don't see a better solution at the moment that would fully take @y1yang0's arguments into account — in other words, I don’t know how to reliably inspect the original arguments passed to go build.

That said, there's one more thing that’s unclear to me: how exactly will we inject the -n flag into the original go build command?

> which prints the build plan without executing it.

Author: > That was not my question. My question was, how it will work from user perspective, additional wrapper command, etc...?

Apologies Przemyslaw, I still don’t fully understand your point. Let me summarize a workflow to see if I can address your concerns:

1. The user runs `otel go build -o foo ./cmd/...`
2. The otel tool extracts the original command: `go build -o foo ./cmd/...`
3. The otel tool appends -n to generate a build plan file: `go build -n -o foo ./cmd/... > build_plan.txt`
4. The subsequent steps remain consistent with the documentation.

From the user’s perspective, all they need to do is prefixing `otel` to the original build command, and the tool will handle the rest of the process automatically.

> which prints the build plan without executing it.

Reviewer: Ok, that answers my question. Just to clarify — I wanted to know whether point `3` is executed by `otel go build -o foo ./cmd/...`, or if it's triggered by some other command that we intend to introduce in between. I hope we're on the same page now.

```command
$ go build -n > build_plan.txt
```

From the build_plan.txt file, the tool extracts all third-party module paths 
(e.g., `github.com/go-redis/redis`, `github.com/gin-gonic/gin`).

## 1.2 Add Dependencies
Once the third-party dependencies are identified, the tool generates a file 
(e.g., otel_import.go) to import the SDK and corresponding hook packages for each 

> dependency:

Reviewer 2: I think this forgets to explain how available hook packages/instrumentation opportunities are identified... Doesn't need to be too detailed, but I am curious what you have in mind.
